readme.md, before:

# ENS160 returns 0's to Raspberry Pi Pico but works perfectly with RPi 3
I posted about this problem on Reddit [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/raspberrypipico/comments/1dcjeqa/i2c_sensor_returning_0s_on_pico_but_works/).

## Observation of RPi 3's interfacing with the sensor (RPi 3 gets it to work perfectly)
At init:
```
Read 2 byte(s) from register 0x0 at address 0x53: 96,1
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x11 at address 0x53: 0
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x13 at address 0x53: 137,74
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x15 at address 0x53: 0,100
```

At read TVOC:
```
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 131
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 129,2,174,0,148,2
```

At read AQI: 
```
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 131
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 129,2,176,0,151,2
```

At read ECO2:
```
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 131
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 129,2,176,0,150,2
```

## Seems to work on Raspberry Pi 3
On June 8, 2024, I had an ENS160 sensor that was NOT working at all on a Raspberry Pi Pico. I plugged it into a Raspberry Pi 3, it started working perfectly right away.

What I saw when using it for the first time, running `main.py` on commit `c6634ce58400f9b807fe5c89328a88f866316022`:
```
Init sequence: reading part ID
Read 2 byte(s) from register 0x0 at address 0x53: 96,1
Init sequence: part ID was correct!
Init sequence: Turning on operating mode
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Init sequence: Reading back op mode...
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x11 at address 0x53: 0
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x13 at address 0x53: 137,74
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x15 at address 0x53: 0,100
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 3
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1,0,0,0,0,0
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
    AQI: 0 [invalid]
   TVOC: 0 ppb
   eCO2: 0 ppm [invalid]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
 Status: operating ok
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 135
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133,1,24,0,144,1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
```

After seeing it work for a few minutes, I then removed it from the Raspberry Pi 3 and then plugged it back in to the Raspberry Pi Pico, ran a test script. Again, didn't work. Same error from before. Bizarre.

Again, I plug it into a Raspberry Pi 3. It works: 

```
Init sequence: reading part ID
Read 2 byte(s) from register 0x0 at address 0x53: 96,1
Init sequence: part ID was correct!
Init sequence: Turning on operating mode
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Init sequence: Reading back op mode...
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x11 at address 0x53: 0
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x13 at address 0x53: 137,74
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x15 at address 0x53: 0,100
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 3
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1,0,0,0,0,0
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
    AQI: 0 [invalid]
   TVOC: 0 ppb
   eCO2: 0 ppm [invalid]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
 Status: operating ok
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 135
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133,1,24,0,144,1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
--------------------------------
```

### Recap of what the Raspberry Pi 3 does to get it to work, step by step
I translated the exact I2C reads/writes to MicroPython so we can easily mimick the reads/writes the RPi 3 made on the Pico. Written in MicroPython:

```
# init and loop 1
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x00, 2) # reads part ID to validate part
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x10, bytes([2])) # operating mode 2
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x10, 1) # read back operating mode 2.      In a test, I only had to get this far to get it back working again on Raspberry Pi Pico
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x11, bytes([0])) # CONFIG address (interupt-pin related)
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x13, bytes([137,74])) # set temperature
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x15, bytes([0, 100])) # set relative humidity 
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 6) # read data (and other)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status

# loop 2
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 6) # all data
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
```

## Monitoring it and observing it turning off
After setting operating mode to 2, waiting a few seconds, and then continuously reading 6 bytes starting at register 0x20, it was working. I had it continuously reading the 6 bytes starting at register 0x20. It was reading data for a few minutes. And then it eventually stopped:

```
b'\x87\x03\x02\x01\xf8\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xf9\x00\xee\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x02\x01\xf9\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x12\x01\t\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xfe\x00\xf4\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xfc\x00\xf2\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x17\x01\x0e\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xf3\x00\xe8\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xdf\x00\xd1\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xfd\x00\xf3\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x15\x01\x0c\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xf9\x00\xef\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xfb\x00\xf1\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xf1\x00\xe5\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x10\x01\x08\x03'
b'\x85\x03\x10\x01\x08\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xed\x00\xe1\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xf3\x00\xe8\x02'
b'\x03\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
```



## Bit Notation
```
Bit 7  Bit 6  Bit 5  Bit 4  Bit 3  Bit 2  Bit 1  Bit 0
1      0      0      0      1      0      1      1
```

Commit message:

Added reddit post that was removed

readme.md, after:

# ENS160 returns 0's to Raspberry Pi Pico but works perfectly with RPi 3
I posted this on the r/raspberrypipico subreddit but it got removed. Not sure why. Full post included below:

## I2C Sensor Returning 0's on Pico but works Perfectly on RPi 3
I'm at my wits end over an ENS160 sensor I have working perfectly with a Raspberry Pi 3 (running full Linux OS and Python), but refuses to return any data when interfacing through a Raspberry Pi Pico with MicroPython.

Long story short, I purchased [these ENS160 + AHT21 combo sensors](https://a.co/d/id3JsgZ). All of them worked quite well with the Raspberry Pi Pico through MicroPython... for a period of time. After a number of days of continuous reading, the ENS160 readings would eventually start returning 0's for all three readings (AQI, TVOC, and ECO2). Initially, it was intermittent and I was able to do some configuration to get it back to life again. But as time went on, they grew more and more unreliable with the 0's coming back more frequently. At this point, many of the sensors simply don't return any data at all, no matter how I configure them. There is also no sign of any error being logged by the ENS160 from what I can tell. The AHT21 sensors all continue to work perfectly, so I don't think it is a problem involving the I2C lines.

What makes this absolutely puzzling: as soon as I wire one of these sensors (that were proven to not work on the Pico) to a Raspberry Pi 3 (running full Linux OS), it works perfectly. Data comes in, fully reliable, never misses a beat. I've tracked the exact register reads and writes by the Raspberry Pi 3 to the sensor and mimicked them completely with the Pico in MicroPython, both at initialization and read; no luck.

What I've tried:
- Maybe the Pico's 5V (or 3.3V which I tried too) power supply is unstable. I tried external power. Same results.
- Adding I2C pull-up resistors when interfacing with the Pi Pico, 10k ohms and 220 ohms. Same results.
- Using a range of clock speeds (frequencies) - everything from 50,000 Hz to 400,000 Hz. Same results.

I've spent weeks now trying to figure out the issue. I've documented a lot of my trials in [this GitHub repo here](https://github.com/TimHanewich/diagnosing-ens160).

How could this be? I was going to chalk this up as a faulty sensor from a poor manufacturer, but this can't be the case as it works perfectly as soon as I hook it up with the Raspberry Pi 3. Any thoughts are appreciated, thank you!

## Observation of RPi 3's interfacing with the sensor (RPi 3 gets it to work perfectly)
At init:
```
Read 2 byte(s) from register 0x0 at address 0x53: 96,1
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x11 at address 0x53: 0
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x13 at address 0x53: 137,74
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x15 at address 0x53: 0,100
```

At read TVOC:
```
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 131
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 129,2,174,0,148,2
```

At read AQI: 
```
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 131
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 129,2,176,0,151,2
```

At read ECO2:
```
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 131
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 129,2,176,0,150,2
```

## Seems to work on Raspberry Pi 3
On June 8, 2024, I had an ENS160 sensor that was NOT working at all on a Raspberry Pi Pico. I plugged it into a Raspberry Pi 3, it started working perfectly right away.

What I saw when using it for the first time, running `main.py` on commit `c6634ce58400f9b807fe5c89328a88f866316022`:
```
Init sequence: reading part ID
Read 2 byte(s) from register 0x0 at address 0x53: 96,1
Init sequence: part ID was correct!
Init sequence: Turning on operating mode
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Init sequence: Reading back op mode...
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x11 at address 0x53: 0
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x13 at address 0x53: 137,74
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x15 at address 0x53: 0,100
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 3
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1,0,0,0,0,0
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
    AQI: 0 [invalid]
   TVOC: 0 ppb
   eCO2: 0 ppm [invalid]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
 Status: operating ok
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 135
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133,1,24,0,144,1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
```

After seeing it work for a few minutes, I then removed it from the Raspberry Pi 3 and then plugged it back in to the Raspberry Pi Pico, ran a test script. Again, didn't work. Same error from before. Bizarre.

Again, I plug it into a Raspberry Pi 3. It works: 

```
Init sequence: reading part ID
Read 2 byte(s) from register 0x0 at address 0x53: 96,1
Init sequence: part ID was correct!
Init sequence: Turning on operating mode
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Init sequence: Reading back op mode...
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x10 at address 0x53: 2
Writing 1 byte(s) to register 0x11 at address 0x53: 0
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x13 at address 0x53: 137,74
Writing 2 byte(s) to register 0x15 at address 0x53: 0,100
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 3
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1,0,0,0,0,0
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
    AQI: 0 [invalid]
   TVOC: 0 ppb
   eCO2: 0 ppm [invalid]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 1
 Status: operating ok
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 135
Read 6 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133,1,24,0,144,1
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
--------------------------------
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
    AQI: 1 [excellent]
   TVOC: 24 ppb
   eCO2: 400 ppm [excellent]
Read 1 byte(s) from register 0x20 at address 0x53: 133
 Status: warm-up
--------------------------------
```

### Recap of what the Raspberry Pi 3 does to get it to work, step by step
I translated the exact I2C reads/writes to MicroPython so we can easily mimick the reads/writes the RPi 3 made on the Pico. Written in MicroPython:

```
# init and loop 1
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x00, 2) # reads part ID to validate part
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x10, bytes([2])) # operating mode 2
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x10, 1) # read back operating mode 2.      In a test, I only had to get this far to get it back working again on Raspberry Pi Pico
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x11, bytes([0])) # CONFIG address (interupt-pin related)
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x13, bytes([137,74])) # set temperature
i2c.writeto_mem(0x53, 0x15, bytes([0, 100])) # set relative humidity 
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 6) # read data (and other)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1) # read status

# loop 2
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 6) # all data
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
i2c.readfrom_mem(0x53, 0x20, 1)
```

## Monitoring it and observing it turning off
After setting operating mode to 2, waiting a few seconds, and then continuously reading 6 bytes starting at register 0x20, it was working. I had it continuously reading the 6 bytes starting at register 0x20. It was reading data for a few minutes. And then it eventually stopped:

```
b'\x87\x03\x02\x01\xf8\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xf9\x00\xee\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x02\x01\xf9\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x12\x01\t\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xfe\x00\xf4\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xfc\x00\xf2\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x17\x01\x0e\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xf3\x00\xe8\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xdf\x00\xd1\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xfd\x00\xf3\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x15\x01\x0c\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xf9\x00\xef\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xfb\x00\xf1\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xf1\x00\xe5\x02'
b'\x87\x03\x10\x01\x08\x03'
b'\x85\x03\x10\x01\x08\x03'
b'\x87\x03\xed\x00\xe1\x02'
b'\x87\x03\xf3\x00\xe8\x02'
b'\x03\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
b'\x01\x00\x00\x00\x00\x00'
```



## Bit Notation
```
Bit 7  Bit 6  Bit 5  Bit 4  Bit 3  Bit 2  Bit 1  Bit 0
1      0      0      0      1      0      1      1
```
